
MySQL Developer Bundle for Windows

INSTALLING

Open the downloaded zip bundle by double clicking it in Windows
Explorer. This opens a directory containing zip files for the included
MySQL products.

Before proceeding to install, we generally recommend referring to
detailed installation and configuration instructions for each product,
available from https://dev.mysql.com/doc/

INCLUDED PRODUCTS

mysql-commercial: The MySQL Server software delivers a very fast,
multi-threaded, multi-user, and robust SQL (Structured Query Language)
database server. This package includes the MySQL server binary as well
as related utilities to run and administer a MySQL server.

mysql-commercial-backup: MySQL Enterprise Backup provides DBAs with a
high-performance, online “hot” backup solution with data compression
technology to ensure your data is protected in case of downtime or an
outage.

mysql-connector-c++-commercial: A C++ interface for communicating with
MySQL servers. The Connector/C++ X DevAPI can also be used by C
applications.

mysql-connector-j-commercial: MySQL Connector/J is the official JDBC
driver for MySQL. MySQL provides connectivity for client applications
developed in the Java programming language with MySQL Connector/J, a
driver that implements the Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) API.

mysql-connector-net-commercial: Connector/NET is a fully-managed ADO.NET
driver for MySQL.

mysql-connector-odbc-commercial: Connector/ODBC is a standardized
database driver for Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, and Unix platforms.
mysql-connector-odbc driver comes in 2 flavours - ANSI and Unicode.

mysql-connector-python-commercial: MySQL Connector/Python enables Python
programs to access MySQL databases, using an API that is compliant with
the Python DB API version 2.0. It is written in pure Python and does not
have any dependencies except for the Python Standard Library. This is
the Python 3 version of the driver.

mysql-router-commercial: MySQL Router is lightweight middleware that
provides transparent routing between your application and any backend
MySQL Servers. It can be used for a wide variety of use cases, such as
providing high availability and scalability by effectively routing
database traffic to appropriate backend MySQL Servers.

mysql-shell-commercial: The MySQL Shell is an interactive Javascript,
Python, or SQL interface supporting development and administration for
the MySQL Server and is a component of the MySQL Server. Users can use
the MySQL Shell to perform data queries and updates as well as various
administration operations.

4 subdivisions of sql
ddl(data defn language(create,drop,alter))
dml(data manipulation language(insert,update,delete))
dcl(data control language(grant,revoke))
dql(data query language(select))
------------------------------------------------------
extra 5th component of mysql/oracle(not ansi standard)
dtl/tcl(data transaction language/transaction control language)
(commit,rollback,savepoint)
ddl(rename,truncate)
------------------------------------------------------
extra in oracle rdbms only
dml(merge,upsert) total 16 commands

Rules of tablename
max 30 characters, (A-Z,a-z,0-9,$,#,_), case sensitive in linux,unix
has to begin with A-Z,a-z
to use reserved characters(#) in tablename and columnname, enclose in ` `
reserved words(134) not allowed in tablename

mysql-datatypes
char
allows any character, A-Z,a-z,0-9 max 255 characters
fixed length,wastage of hd space
searching & retrieval is fast
default width 1

varchar
allows any character, A-Z,a-z,0-9 max 65535 characters 64kb-1
variable length. conserves hd space
searching & retrieval is comparatively slow
no default width; has to be specified

longtext
allows any character A-Z.a-z,0-9
max 4,294,967,295 characters 4gb-1
eg feedback comments, remarks, post
stored outside the table/row.stored away from the table/away from the row
mysql maintains a locator(hd pointer) from longtext column to longtext data
performance of other columns in table is not affected 
not used for those columns that are only for storage and display purposes
width does not have to be specified
eg feedback longtext
variable length

binary 
fixed length binary string
max upto 255 bytes of binary data
eg barcodes qrcodes,picturecodes,signatures,fingerprints,
width need not be specified


varbinary
variable length binary strength 65535 bytes 64kb-1
icons,gifs with sound, thumbnail
no default width; has to be specified

BOTH OF THE ABOVE ARE STORED AS CHARACTER STRINGS OF 0'S AND 1'S

blob(binary large object)


longblob
max upto 4,294,967,295, bytes of binary data 4gb-1
eg photographs, charts, graphs, maps, sound, music, videos
eg photograph longblob
stored outside the table outisde the row away from table away from the row
mysql maintains a locator(hd pointer) from longblob column to longblob data
performance of other columns in table is not affected 
not used for those columns that are only for storage and display purposes
width does not have to be specified

integer types(exact value)
signed or unsigned by default it is signed
tinyint(1B), smallint(2B), mediumint(3B),int(4B),bigint(8B)

floating point types(approx value)
float(7 decimals,),double(15 decimals)

fixed point types(exact value)
decimal(double as string)
used when imp to preserve exact precision for eg with monetary data
 
boolean 
logical datatypes stores true and false
eg marital status 

date and time datatypes
date 1jan 1000ad to 31dec 9999ad no problem of y2k in mysql
yyyy-mm-dd
1970 is known as year of epoch
date1-date2-> returns number of days between 2 dates
1 jan 1000ad-->1
2 jan 1000ad-->2
3 jan 1000ad-->3
9 oct 2024--> 1657218 num of days since 1 jan 1000ad 
internally stored as a number num of days since 1jan 1000ad, 7 bytes storage

time 
hh:mm:ss or hhh:mm:ss
time values may range from -838:59:59 to +838:59:59
time1-time2

datetime 
date & time stored together yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss default format in mysql
1jan 1000ad 00:00:00 to 9999-12-31 23:59:59

year
1901 to 2155

in mysql
max 4096 columns per table provided row size <=65535 rows 
no limit on number of rows provided table size <=64tb
amazon orders table-largest table -->100tb daily
